---
title: "Demystifying-AI-For-Clinicians."
date: 2025-05-15
---


In the rapidly evolving landscape of medicine, artificial intelligence (AI) is transforming the way healthcare is delivered. Recognizing its significance, clinicians must adopt and adjust to the AI ecosystem, particularly the composition and quality of datasets used in AI tools, and understand the algorithms driving applications such as chatbots like ChatGPT (Generative Pre-training Transformer). This article is introduction to AI and its application to specific patient populations, enhancing clinical care, designing innovative medications, and curbing healthcare expenditures. The New England Journal of Medicine's AI journal underscores this imperative, emphasizing the mission to leverage AI in augmenting the capabilities of clinicians, patients, and stakeholders, thereby ensuring the delivery of safe and effective healthcare at the highest standards.

In this comprehensive review, our primary goal is to provide clinicians with a holistic understanding of AI in medicine. We begin by delving into the fundamentals of AI, elucidating the core components including data inputs, generated outputs, and the underlying nature of algorithms. Next, we explore the vast landscape of health-related AI applications, ranging from diagnostic aids to treatment optimization tools. Importantly, we equip clinicians with the necessary knowledge to access critical information about specific AI-based tools, emphasizing the importance of understanding their limitations and potential biases before integration into patient care practices. Furthermore, we advocate for practice-based learning and continuous improvement when utilizing AI-based tools in clinical, especially primary care, settings. We have also included a set of definitions commonly used in AI ecosystem. To conclude, the authors will share insightful use cases to illustrate real-world applications of AI in enhancing patient care and clinical outcomes.

WHAT IS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE?

In the realm of modern technology, AI stands as a remarkable achievement, reshaping the boundaries of what machines can accomplish. Defined as the simulation of human intelligence processes by machines, particularly computer systems, it encompasses the emulation of quintessential human faculties, including learning, reasoning, problem-solving, perception, and language understanding. AI systems, therefore, endeavor to undertake tasks that traditionally necessitate human intelligence, spanning from rudimentary functions to intricate endeavors. At its core, AI epitomizes the convergence of various technological disciplines, prominently featuring machine learning, deep learning, natural language processing, and neural networks. Yet, amidst its remarkable capabilities, it is imperative to acknowledge the inherent distinction between AI and human cognition. While AI aptly replicates certain cognitive functions, it lacks the intrinsic capacity for abstract thought and generalization, characteristic of human intelligence. In essence, AI heralds a paradigm shift in human-machine interaction, transcending conventional limitations to augment and amplify human endeavors. It facilitates the automation and propels innovation across diverse domains, from healthcare to finance. However, it's paramount to grasp both the potential and limitations of AI to harness its transformative potential effectively.

HISTORICAL JOURNEY

The journey of AI spans many millennia, evolving from rudimentary tabulating methods to the sophisticated constructs of modern computing. The roots of AI can be traced back nearly 2000 years, with the invention of the abacus, heralding the dawn of computational methodologies. Advancements continued through the centuries, culminating in the visionary endeavors of Charles Babbage and Ada Lovelace in the 19th century. Their conceptualization of the "difference engine" laid the groundwork for computational theory, although the project remained incomplete. The pivotal moment in the history of AI arrived in 1956 when John McCarthy, an influential computer scientist, coined the term "artificial intelligence" at the inaugural AI conference held at Dartmouth College. This seminal event marked the formal inception of AI as a distinct field of study and exploration. Following the inception of the term AI, the subsequent decades witnessed exponential growth and innovation in the field. Then came the hype around the AI in 1960s and 1970s, followed by the AI winter with investors turning away. Before artificial intelligence became popular a sort of augmented intelligence systems were already in use augmenting human abilities, things like screen readers, voice-driven navigation systems, which helped perform human work. With the emergence of powerful computer systems and cloud computing moved from ‘augmented’ to ‘Artificial intelligence’ domain.

BASIC PRINCIPLES

Modern sophisticated calculating machines can perform what’s called machine learning as they acquire new data. Using these learnings in algorithms is somewhat similar to neurons in the human brain, can even perform deep learning. AI's evolution from narrow to general intelligence has revolutionized computing. Deep learning, inspired by the human brain's neural networks, allows algorithms to autonomously acquire data and learn, eliminating the need for human intervention in feature selection. Computer scientists classify AI into three levels: Narrow AI, focused on specific tasks like predicting purchases; Broad AI, versatile in handling related tasks such as weather prediction; and General AI, mirroring human intellectual capabilities. While AI excels in data analysis and prediction, it lacks the abstract thinking and creativity inherent in human cognition, a critical distinction in its current state.

The three types of data organization include structured, semi-structured, and unstructured data. Structured data is highly organized, with a clear format and defined relationships between elements, making it easily searchable and analyzable. Semi-structured data, while containing some organizational elements, lacks a rigid structure, often found in formats like XML or JSON. Unstructured data, on the other hand, lacks any predefined format or organization, encompassing a wide range of content such as text documents, images, and multimedia files. In the context of AI, data engineers play a crucial role in organizing and preparing data for analysis. They develop systems equipped with algorithms that enable machines to learn from the provided data. This process of machine learning empowers AI systems to make accurate predictions and insights based on the analyzed data. Ultimately, the effectiveness of AI systems hinges on the quality and organization of the data they operate on. As the volume and complexity of data continue to expand, the role of data engineers and the importance of robust data organization methodologies become increasingly vital in unlocking the full potential of artificial intelligence in various domains, including healthcare, finance, and beyond.

Machine learning, a cornerstone of AI, operates through algorithms or specialized programs that enable machines to learn from data. Unlike traditional binary systems that yield straight forward "yes" or "no" outcomes, machine learning adopts an analog approach, akin to waves gradually fluctuating, allowing for nuanced interpretations and probabilistic predictions. Within the realm of machine learning, three primary methodologies are employed: supervised learning, unsupervised learning, and reinforcement learning. Supervised learning entails providing AI systems with ample examples to facilitate accurate predictions. Conversely, unsupervised learning involves feeding machines vast amounts of data and prompting them to autonomously discern patterns and insights without explicit guidance. Reinforcement learning represents a dynamic paradigm where algorithms learn through trial and error rather than predefined sample data. This iterative approach mirrors human learning, as the model adjusts its actions based on feedback received from its environment, gradually optimizing its performance over time. Each approach to machine learning offers unique advantages and applications, ranging from predictive analytics to pattern recognition and optimization. Supervised learning excels in scenarios where labeled data is readily available, facilitating precise predictions in diverse domains such as finance and healthcare. Unsupervised learning, on the other hand, uncovers hidden patterns within vast datasets, offering invaluable insights into consumer behavior and market trends. Reinforcement learning, with its adaptive nature, finds utility in dynamic environments where constant adaptation and optimization are paramount. From autonomous vehicles navigating complex roadways to strategic decision-making in gaming and robotics, reinforcement learning exemplifies the versatility and efficacy of AI in real-world applications.

APPLICATIONS OF AI

Machine learning permeates various facets of human life, revolutionizing interactions and augmenting capabilities across diverse domains. One of its prominent applications lies in natural language processing (NLP), where machine learning algorithms dissect languages into tokens and further analyze them for entities, relationships, and concepts. Chatbots exemplify the fusion of NLP with intent recognition and dialog management, enabling swift and accurate responses to user queries. Through processes like passage and evidence scoring, NLP enhances chatbot interactions by identifying relevant sentence components and selecting appropriate responses with high confidence. Visual recognition systems leverage convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to discern objects within images, facilitating tasks such as facial recognition and object detection. These systems employ sophisticated algorithms to analyze image features, enabling precise identification of objects and patterns. Additionally, generative adversarial networks (GANs) enable the creation of computer-generated "deep fakes," blurring the boundaries between reality and synthetic content. At the core of machine learning lies the deep learning ecosystem, characterized by neural networks—a foundational concept underpinning various AI applications. Neural networks, comprising interconnected perceptrons that acts as the equivalent of a single neuron, engage in mathematical computations, rather than abstract thought processes. Through continuous learning and adaptation, neural networks refine their predictions and insights, iterating through trial and error to optimize performance. Generative AI represents a pioneering frontier in artificial intelligence, capable of generating novel content unseen before. OpenAI's ChatGPT and Google's Bard exemplify the transformative potential of generative AI, enabling natural language interactions and content generation. In healthcare, generative AI holds promise for enhancing disease diagnosis, medical imaging, and personalized medicine. Synthetic medical images generated by generative AI aid in diagnosing rare diseases, while medical simulations facilitate training and error reduction among healthcare professionals. PathAI harnesses generative AI to enhance disease diagnosis accuracy through deep learning algorithms, revolutionizing pathology analysis. Leveraging massive-scale learning, generative AI models like LLM (large language models) boast billions of parameters, enabling probabilistic reasoning and predictive capabilities on an unprecedented scale. As machine learning continues to evolve, its applications transcend boundaries, reshaping industries and enriching human experiences. From chatbots streamlining communication to generative AI advancing healthcare diagnostics, the transformative potential of machine learning underscores its indispensable role in shaping the future of human-machine interaction.

In the realm of healthcare, the integration of artificial intelligence and machine learning holds immense promise for transforming medical practice and improving patient outcomes. One of the key areas where AI is making significant strides is in the analysis of medical records, which are often represented as sequences of time-stamped clinical events encoded with medical codes and textual documents. These rich datasets serve as valuable training data for language models, which can extract insights and patterns from the vast amount of information contained within. Medical LLMs encompass two primary categories: those trained on textual documents and those trained on sequences of medical codes. Document-based LLMs, such as GPT-3, are trained on clinical or biomedical text and excel at tasks like predicting the next word in a document. On the other hand, code-based LLMs analyze the sequence and timing of medical events in a patient's record, learning to predict future sets of codes or the time until a certain code appears. Prominent LLMs like Claude-instant-v1.0, GPT-3.5-Turbo, Command-xlarge-nightly, and Bloomz showcase the versatility and efficacy of these models in generating medical content and extracting meaningful insights from patient records. AI's impact on healthcare extends beyond record analysis, with applications ranging from radiology to molecular and genetic data analysis. In radiology, AI algorithms can analyze medical images with unprecedented speed and accuracy, aiding in the early detection and diagnosis of diseases. Similarly, AI algorithms can sift through vast amounts of molecular and genetic data to distinguish between malignant and harmless cells, enabling more targeted and effective treatments. Furthermore, AI-powered predictive analytics can identify patterns in medical data that may signal impending health problems, allowing healthcare providers to intervene earlier and prevent complications. By facilitating earlier diagnosis and intervention, AI has the potential to improve the cost-efficiency of medical care and reduce healthcare expenditures. As of September 2021, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved 343 AI/Machine Learning-enabled medical devices for use in various clinical settings, with a significant portion focused on radiology applications. These approvals underscore the growing acceptance and adoption of AI technologies in healthcare, paving the way for more widespread integration of AI into medical practice and decision-making. 

In summary, AI and Machine Learning are revolutionizing healthcare by enabling more accurate diagnosis, personalized treatment planning, and proactive disease management. With ongoing advancements in AI technology and increased regulatory approval of AI-enabled medical devices, the future of healthcare holds great promise for leveraging AI to improve patient outcomes and enhance the efficiency of medical care delivery.

Some of the real-world implementations of AI at scale are listed below:

ETH spin-off dAIgnose is developing an algorithm that can be used to analyse ultrasound images of the womb on an automated basis. This should enable doctors to diagnose endometriosis more quickly in the future.

To improve early diagnosis and treatment of prostate cancer, ACR, AdMeTech Foundation and ESUR formed a joint effort to develop standards for the Prostate Imaging Reporting and Data System (PI-RADS®).

PMcardio’s AI algorithms are trained on a dataset of one million patient ECGs, which makes them exceptionally proficient in diagnosing 38 different cardiovascular diseases. Healthcare professionals can leverage the recommendations for quick and accurate diagnosis and tailored treatment. PMcardio is a clinically validated CE-certified Class II(b) Medical Device (EU MDR).

While artificial intelligence holds immense potential to revolutionize healthcare, caution is warranted due to the possibility of incorrect results and biases inherent in AI systems. As these technologies are deployed to clinical end users, it is crucial to educate them about the potential trade-offs and biases, enabling informed decision-making and mitigating potential risks. Additionally, rigorous monitoring for safety and usefulness, coupled with ethical oversight, is essential to prevent exacerbating existing inequities in healthcare delivery. Assessing the suitability of machine learning systems for clinical usage poses a significant challenge in this emerging field. While machine learning systems are often validated in retrospective or prospective trials, and sometimes with simulated data, more randomized control trials are needed to provide a comprehensive evaluation of their efficacy and safety. Recent guidelines for AI-related publications emphasize the importance of rigorous evaluation methodologies, highlighting the need for robust evidence to support the clinical implementation of machine learning systems. Despite the challenges and uncertainties surrounding AI in healthcare, ongoing research and development efforts are driving innovation and progress in the field. By fostering collaboration among stakeholders, including researchers, clinicians, regulators, and policymakers, we can address the complexities of AI adoption in healthcare and harness its transformative potential to improve patient outcomes and enhance the delivery of healthcare services. Through continuous evaluation, validation, and ethical oversight, we can ensure that AI technologies contribute positively to the advancement of healthcare while minimizing potential risks and biases.

A CASE FOR PRIMARY CARE AI

The urgent need for improvement in primary care, both for clinicians and patients, necessitates the integration of AI to deliver safer, more efficient, and cost-effective healthcare. AI offers a myriad of prospective uses in clinical practice, spanning various tasks and processes. Messaging services enhanced by AI can streamline communication between healthcare providers and patients, facilitating prompt responses and ensuring timely access to care. Furthermore, AI-powered tools can automate the drafting of clinical notes and authorization forms, reducing administrative burdens on clinicians and enabling them to focus more on patient care. Identifying appropriate patients for screening, such as those at risk for cardiovascular disease or cancer, becomes more efficient with AI algorithms that analyze patient data and identify candidates for preventive interventions. Additionally, AI-driven reminders for patient revisits and follow-ups enhance continuity of care and adherence to treatment plans, ultimately improving patient outcomes. Quick summaries of patient lab reports generated by AI systems enable clinicians to rapidly assess patient health status and make informed decisions about further diagnostic or treatment interventions. Moreover, AI can assist clinicians in generating lists of potential differential diagnoses and recommending evidence-based treatment plans based on patient-specific factors. By leveraging AI technologies in these ways, frontline healthcare providers can optimize their workflows, improve clinical decision-making, and enhance the overall quality of care delivery. Embracing AI as a partner in healthcare represents a critical step forward for clinicians and patients alike. By harnessing the capabilities of AI, healthcare providers can address the pressing challenges of primary care delivery, ultimately leading to better health outcomes and lower costs. It is imperative for frontline healthcare providers to embrace AI as a valuable ally in their quest to deliver high-quality, accessible healthcare for all. Through collaboration and innovation, AI has the potential to revolutionize primary care and usher in a new era of patient-centered healthcare delivery.

CHALLENGES 

The challenges with AI applications can be addressed in following points:-

•	Bias mainly due to the fact that the machine learning models are trained o
